feat(kernel,initrd): extend plugins with new options, stabilize (#6254)
snapcore/snapcraft: docs/reference/plugins/kernel_plugin.rst

.. meta::

>     :description: Understand the usage and meaning of the varies keys and environment variables used by the kernel plugin. See an example, test cases, and real world usage.

Reviewer: Required:

```suggestion
    :description: Reference documentation for the kernel plugin, which builds Linux kernel snaps.
```

**Default**: ``["defconfig"]``

The kernel configurations to use when generating a ``.config``. Multiple items
in the list may be specified, but their order matters. Items later in the list

> take precedent over earlier items.

Reviewer: Required:

```suggestion
take precedence over earlier items.
```

> If ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package`` is ``true``, then the specified kdefconfig

Reviewer: Recommended:

To disambiguate keys from env vars, snap config values, build system settings, and so on, it's a good idea to specify "the ``x`` key". Depending on context it might be highly unlikely to confuse them, but when speaking about strict interactions between different keys, I err on clarity.

Author: Fair shout.

> files must be in the annotations format and located in ``${CRAFT_PROJECT_DIR}/annotations``.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
files must be in the annotations format and located in ``${CRAFT_PROJECT_DIR}/annotations/``.
```

https://documentation.ubuntu.com/starflow/latest/how-to/starcraft-style-guide/#file-paths

> If ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package`` is ``false``, then the specified  kdefconfig

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package`` is ``false``, then the specified kdefconfig
```

Michael's gonna be proud of me for spotting this one.

Author: Nice catch. I'm proud of you.

> files must be in the regular kconfig fragment style and located in either

Reviewer 2: > regular kconfig fragment style

Can we expect the target audience of this plugin to know what this means? I'm assuming the answer to this "if" is no, but _if_ there exists a good resource to explain this then it may be nice to link to it here.

Author: The phrase "Kconfig fragment" is well-understood in the context of kernels and their configs - most if not all configs are actually fragments. `make savedefconfig` produces a minimal Kconfig fragment which reproduces the `.config` which was in-place.

I don't know that there's a good place to link to which explains the notion. The kernel documentation doesn't strictly mention "fragments", but the mailing list archive is replete with references. I don't think it's unreasonable to suspect that someone who was trying to do this kind of work would know what is meant by `kconfig fragment` or at least able to infer what it may mean from the context if they weren't familiar with the term.

Reviewer 2: Good enough for me! I was just making sure since _I_ didn't know

``kernel-ubuntu-kconfigflavour`` keys. The kernel build system is used to resolve any
configuration dependencies or invalid combinations.

> If ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package`` is ``true``, this option is unavailable.

Reviewer: What do you think of:

```suggestion
If ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package`` is ``true``, this key has no effect.
```

A list of kernel tools to build. If set, the specified tools will be built and added to
the final snap package.

> This option is incompatible with ``kernel-ubuntu-binary-package`` and instead,

Reviewer: Any non-nil value?

Author: Wait, are we hard on "option" or "key"?

Not certain what you might mean by "any non-nil value" -- nil values won't do anything, invalid values would cause an error. non-nil for this key, or others?

Reviewer: I prefer "key", because it doesn't overlap with the generic sense of options in build systems and CLI arguments. We strive to be consistent with this in the docs.

For non-nil, I'm double-checking whether setting `kernel-ubuntu-binary-package` to _anything_ acceptable value will block `kernel-tools`, or if it's more nuanced than that.

Author: `kernel-ubuntu-binary-package` is a bool so I suppose there's only the two options, and it's `false` by default so setting it `true` means you can't use this. Indeed, it's tested for and fails:

```
    @pydantic.model_validator(mode="after")
    def validate_binary_and_tools_exclusive(self) -> Self:
        """Enforce binary_package and tools options are mutually exclusive"""
        binary = self.kernel_ubuntu_binary_package
        if binary and self.kernel_tools:
            raise errors.PartsError(
                brief="'kernel-tools' cannot be used with 'kernel-ubuntu-binary-package'",
                resolution="Add the required tools to 'stage-packages' instead",
            )
        return self
```

> the tools to include should be specified in ``stage-packages``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This key is incompatible with the ``kernel-ubuntu-binary-package`` key. Instead,
the tools should be specified in ``stage-packages``.
```

Valid values are Ubuntu release code names like ``jammy``, ``lunar``, or ``noble``.

kernel-ubuntu-abinumber
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Type**: string

A string which specifies a particular kernel version and, more importantly,
ABI number of the kernel package to build. This value is meaningful when
``kernel-ubuntu-release-name`` or ``kernel-ubuntu-binary-package`` are used. For the

> former, this value will be used when cloning the git repository for the chosen release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
former, this value will be used when cloning the Git repository for the chosen release.
```

Git is the VCS, `git` is the command name.

Author: Foiled again!

> For the latter, this value will be used to specify the kernel version of the debian

Reviewer: There are a few other instances of this:

```suggestion
For the latter, this value will be used to specify the kernel version of the Debian
```

Author: I think I got them all.

Reviewer: I still count six on the latest build.

Author: Indeed, I did not push my changes but trust me they're fixed! :D

Author: Should be fixed in the most recent (force) push.

   for a viable workaround.

kernel-ubuntu-debian-package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Type**: bool

**Default**: ``false``

> If enabled, the kernel will be built following how debian packages traditionally are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If enabled, the kernel will be built following Debian package conventions.
```

This means that the build steps are handled by the ``debian/rules`` makefile, rather
than any direct ``make`` invocations as is done in other cases with this plugin.

This option is primarily intended to be used by the Canonical Kernel team. Its

> usage requires the kernel source provides a valid ``debian/`` directory.

Reviewer: Consider:

```suggestion
This option is primarily intended to be used by the Canonical Kernel team. If set,
the kernel source must contain a valid ``debian/`` directory.
```

"valid" could also be "well-formed".

Author: I think "valid" is sufficient; anyone who knows what this sentence means (I certainly don't) would know what suffices.

kernel-ubuntu-debian-dkms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Type**: list of strings

A list of DKMS packages to include in the debian package build of the kernel.

> This option is only meaningful when used with ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Requires the ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package`` key to be set.
```

Author: `set` or `true`? It's a bool, so setting it is equivalent to `key to be 'true'`, but I'm uncertain of the vernacular you're establishing with your audience.

Reviewer: Similar to the "non-nil" question from earlier. "is/if set" and "is/if unset" is meant to succinctly communicate "if this key is declared in your project file". 

If the key must indeed be `true`, then it should read something like

> Requires the `kernel...` key to be set to `true`.

Or:

> This key only takes effect if the `kernel...` key is set to `true`.

---

Config values are tricky to write about, because they have three states:

- Not assigned by the user, and with no default value
- Not assigned by the user, with a default value (most often true/false, but non-bool and procedural values are also possible)
- Assigned by the user

The result is that asserting _any_ value and asserting _no_ value are important distinctions for the user. In terms of guidance, we need succinct language to communicate a user's inaction (_unset_) in and action (_set_).

Author: That all makes sense. I suppose I took the position of documenting deviations from default behavior, which impacts the phrasing of things like this; ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package`` is an "optional" key, and isn't present in a project file *unless* the user intentionally adds it; because it's a bool, it couldn't be set to anything else, and so it being "set" is equivalent to it being "True".

I can always be more explicit, though. Indeed, I *am* explicit about this in other places (line 56, for instance). So I'll change this to match:

```
Requires the ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package`` key to be ``true``.
```

   for a viable workaround.

kernel-ubuntu-debian-package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Type**: bool

**Default**: ``false``

If enabled, the kernel will be built following how debian packages traditionally are.

> This means that the build steps are handled by the :file:`debian/rules` makefile, rather

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that the build steps are handled by the ``debian/rules`` makefile, rather
```
A TA can correct me on this if I'm wrong, but I believe we avoid using the `:file:` directive because it gets slightly different CSS styling than plain code blocks, and it looks jarring.

Author: I'm fine with dropping the usage, a TA can confirm :)

Author: He's dead, Jim

than any direct ``make`` invocations as is done in other cases with this plugin.

This option is primarily intended to be used by the Canonical Kernel team, although it
is a valid option for anyone so long as the kernel source (as specified by the other

> various options) provides a valid :file:`debian/` directory.

Reviewer 2: I don't see any reason to explain _who_ an option is for. I think it's fine to emphasize that you need a valid `debian/` dir, though.

How it works
------------

There are three primary patterns for this plugin depending on the selected keys.

> 1. ``kernel-ubuntu-binary-package: true``

Reviewer: Did starting with `#.` do something funky?

Author: I didn't realize I could start with `#`. I follow what the [stack suggests](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/sphinx-stack/latest/reference/rst-syntax/#lists).

Reviewer: The intent there was likely to point out you can start at any arbitrary integer, and alphas are supported. The first `#.` should default to `1.`.

Author: Nifty! Renders fine. I think you're right.

#. ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package: true``
#. Neither

Binary package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the case where building from a binary package, most of the processes used by
this plugin are skipped. Instead, a prebuilt kernel image and its associated

> modules are fetched from the archive and staged to the expected locations for a

Reviewer: Super nit:

```suggestion
modules are fetched from the archive and staged at the expected locations for a
```

Author: 1) I adore super nits
2) This is insane are you kidding me

I didn't spend three weeks failing to understand prepositions in the eighth grade just for this to happen to me.

kernel snap.

This option is the fastest route to producing a kernel snap when a kernel debian

> package already exists, and no real changes need to be made to it.

Reviewer: "real" is a subjective qualifier. Could we be more concrete?

Author: "real" in this case means something more like "actual" -- what I'm trying to get at is that *every other option* (well, most) is intended for the intensive case, where one needs to make changes to the options enabled at kernel build time. This route is special, in that you're *fine* with how the kernel was built, you just *want a snap* instead. So I think 'actual' captures that?

Reviewer: What would it mean if we wrote "no changes need to be made" or "the kernel Debian package is intended to be used as-is"?

Author: I think either option would be equivalent to what I am trying to say; I'll go with the second phrasing.

How it works
------------

There are three primary patterns for this plugin depending on the selected keys.

1. ``kernel-ubuntu-binary-package: true``
#. ``kernel-ubuntu-debian-package: true``

> #. Neither

Reviewer 2: This mixed usage of `1.` and `#.` strikes fear in me

Author: Yeah RST is bothersome like that.
Have you seen mardown's tho? It's just `1.\n1.\n1.\n1. ...`...

Binary package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the case where building from a binary package, most of the process used by

> this plugin is skipped. Instead, a prebuilt kernel image and its associated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this plugin are skipped. Instead, a prebuilt kernel image and its associated
```

Author: Isn't `is` acting on `process` -.-

Reviewer 2: Oh... My mind read the word "process" as "processes", I think. Something about it being singular here feels weird to me, but if you think that's more semantically correct then leave it :)

modules are fetched from the archive and staged to the expected locations for a
kernel snap.

This option is the fastest route to producing a kernel snap when a kernel debian
package already exists, and no real changes need to be made to it.

Debian package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This case performs a source-based build, following the standard Ubuntu kernel
build method as closely as possible. Ultimately, ``dpkg`` and its associated
tools are responsible for configuring and building a kernel and its modules,
with options to include DKMS packages from the archive or to build the supported
kernel tools.

By the end, several deb packages will be produced and then extracted and staged.
This option is the most direct route of producing a kernel snap when substantive

> changes to the kernel do not need to be made (no real kernel code changes, just

Reviewer 2: This phrasing somewhat duplicates the reasoning for using the "bin" method ("no substantive changes needed"), which caused me to go back to make sure I didn't misread the previous part.

Could this focus more on the "package already exists" vs "no package exists" difference, and instead let the last option focus on the fact that it's for highly custom builds?

Author: The difference isn't necessarily that the package exists or doesn't, or even that the build is being customized. That's the annoying thing about the option. As such, it is in fact a sliding scale sort of option between a strict bin package build versus a from-source build.

Perhaps something like:

```suggestion
This option supplants the binary package option in cases where the kernel must
be customized in some way, but the standard debian tooling still needs to be
used to build the kernel.
```

Reviewer 2: Much better!
